AWS provisioning quick start with Pulumi (#706)
akka/akka-platform-guide: docs-source/docs/modules/deployment/pages/aws-install-quickstart.adoc

= Installation on Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) Quick Start
:page-toclevels: 3

include::partial$include.adoc[]

NOTE: To install Akka Cloud Platform on Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS), you must have an Amazon account and a subscription to the {aws-marketplace}[Akka Cloud Platform {tab-icon}, window="tab"].

== Expected Time to Install

A new installation will take approximately _40 minutes_ to _1 hour_ depending on which components are installed.
By default the following components will be provisioned.

1. Create an Amazon EKS cluster
2. Install the Kubernetes Metrics Server
3. Install the Akka Cloud Platform Helm chart

> 4. (Optional) Setup an Amazon MSK cluster
> 5. (Optional) Setup an Amazon Aurora RDS cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. (Optional) Setup an Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK) cluster
5. (Optional) Setup an Amazon Aurora Relational Database Service (RDS) cluster
```

:sectnums:

== Verify Prerequisites

> Before installation you must subscribe to the {aws-marketplace}[Akka Cloud Platform {tab-icon}, window="tab"] on AWS Marketplace by clicking the Subscribe button on the product page and accepting the terms and conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before installation, you must subscribe to the {aws-marketplace}[Akka Cloud Platform {tab-icon}, window="tab"] on AWS Marketplace by clicking the Subscribe button on the product page and accepting the terms and conditions.
```

To install and use the Akka Cloud Platform, you must have the following tools installed. We recommend using the latest versions of these tools. If you do not have them yet or need to update, we provide links to installation instructions:

* The https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[`git` {tab-icon}, window="tab"] command-line tool to clone the Pulumi Playbook.

* The https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm[`npm` {tab-icon}, window="tab"] command-line tool to download and setup the NPM dependencies of the Pulumi Playbook.

* The https://www.pulumi.com/[Pulumi {tab-icon}, window="tab"] cloud engineering (provisioning) tool to run the Playbook.

> In addition in order to actually operate the cluster you should also setup:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, in order to actually operate the cluster, you should also setup:
```

* The Kubernetes command-line tool, `kubectl`, allows you to run commands against Kubernetes clusters. Follow the instructions in the https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[Kubernetes documentation {tab-icon}, window="tab"]  to install `kubectl`.

== Quick Start with Pulumi Playbook

Pulumi is a cloud provisioning tool that can be used to setup cloud infrastructure and Kubernetes cluster resources.
The fastest way to get started with Akka Cloud Platform is to run the Akka Cloud Platform Deployment Pulumi playbook.

To begin, download and install the https://www.pulumi.com/docs/get-started/install/[Pulumi {tab-icon}, window="tab"] cloud engineering (provisioning) tool for your platform.

Download (clone) the https://github.com/lightbend/akka-cloud-platform-deploy[Akka Cloud Platform Deployment Pulumi Playbook {tab-icon}, window="tab"] with https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[`git` {tab-icon}, window="tab"].

Navigate to the base directory of the cloned repository in a terminal.

> Install `npm` dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install `npm` dependencies:
```

[source,shell script]
----
npm install
----

Initialize a new Pulumi stack configuration.

[source,shell script]
----
pulumi stack init
----

Choose an AWS region to use.

[source,shell script]
----
pulumi config set aws:region eu-central-1
----

Preview and provision the playbook:

[source,shell script]
----
pulumi up
----

If the provisioning is successful then all the pertinent details of the cluster will be output to the console (except for passwords).
You can copy & paste this configuration, or access it at the command line with `pulumi stack output <OUTPUT KEY>`.

== Connect to the Amazon EKS Cluster

> To setup your local `kubectl` configuration you can obtain the Pulumi `kubeconfig` output by exporting it to a file and defining the `KUBE_CONFIG` environment variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To setup your local `kubectl` configuration you can obtain the Pulumi `kubeconfig` output by exporting it to a file and defining the `KUBECONFIG` environment variable:
```

[source,shell script]
----
pulumi stack output kubeconfig > kubeconfig.yml
export KUBECONFIG=./kubeconfig.yml
----

> Or, if you have the `aws` command line tool you can use `aws eks update-kubeconfig` to update your `.kube/config`.

Reviewer: This looks more convenient than the steps above, although I was surprised that Pulumi is not updating `~/.kube/config` already. 🤔

Author: It won't do it on your behalf (AFAIK). The KUBECONFIG returned is just an output like any other variable.

> Or, if you have the `aws` command line tool you can use `aws eks update-kubeconfig` to update your `.kube/config`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or, if you have the `aws` command line tool you can use `aws eks update-kubeconfig` to update your `~/.kube/config`.
```

[source,shell script]
----
aws eks update-kubeconfig --region $(pulumi config get "aws:region") --name $(pulumi stack output clusterName)
----

=== Connect to MSK Kafka cluster

_TODO_

=== Connect to Aurora RDS

To open a Postgres interactive shell with the Aurora DB:

[source,shell script]
----
kubectl run -i --tty rds-mgmt --image=postgres --restart=Never --rm \
  --env=PGPASSWORD=$(pulumi stack output dbPassword --show-secrets) -- \
  psql -h $(pulumi stack output dbEndpoint) -U acpadmin -d acp
----

== Pulumi Playbook Outputs

The following output variables are available:

Amazon EKS

* `clusterName` - Cluster name

> * `kubeconfig` - Complete contents of a `KUBE_CONFIG` configuration for the provisioned cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `kubeconfig` - Complete contents of a `KUBECONFIG` configuration for the provisioned cluster
```

To install and use the Akka Cloud Platform, you must have the following tools installed. We recommend using the latest versions of these tools. If you do not have them yet or need to update, we provide links to installation instructions:

* The https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[`git` {tab-icon}, window="tab"] command-line tool to clone the Pulumi Playbook.

* The https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm[`npm` {tab-icon}, window="tab"] command-line tool to download and setup the NPM dependencies of the Pulumi Playbook.

* The https://www.pulumi.com/[Pulumi {tab-icon}, window="tab"] cloud engineering (provisioning) tool to run the Playbook.

In addition, in order to actually operate the cluster, you should also setup:

* The Kubernetes command-line tool, `kubectl`, allows you to run commands against Kubernetes clusters. Follow the instructions in the https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[Kubernetes documentation {tab-icon}, window="tab"]  to install `kubectl`.

== Quick Start with Pulumi Playbook

Pulumi is a cloud provisioning tool that can be used to setup cloud infrastructure and Kubernetes cluster resources.

> The fastest way to get started with Akka Cloud Platform is to run the Akka Cloud Platform Deployment Pulumi playbook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fastest way to get started with Akka Cloud Platform on EKS is to run the Akka Cloud Platform Deployment Pulumi playbook.
```

= Installation on Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) Quick Start
:page-toclevels: 3

include::partial$include.adoc[]

NOTE: To install Akka Cloud Platform on Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS), you must have an Amazon account and a subscription to the {aws-marketplace}[Akka Cloud Platform {tab-icon}, window="tab"].

== Expected Time to Install

> A new installation will take approximately _40 minutes_ to _1 hour_ depending on which components are installed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new installation will take approximately  _ from 40 minutes_ to _1 hour_ depending on which components are installed.
```

3. Install the Akka Cloud Platform Helm chart
4. (Optional) Setup an Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK) cluster
5. (Optional) Setup an Amazon Aurora Relational Database Service (RDS) cluster

:sectnums:

== Verify Prerequisites

Before installation, you must subscribe to the {aws-marketplace}[Akka Cloud Platform {tab-icon}, window="tab"] on AWS Marketplace by clicking the Subscribe button on the product page and accepting the terms and conditions.

To install and use the Akka Cloud Platform, you must have the following tools installed. We recommend using the latest versions of these tools. If you do not have them yet or need to update, we provide links to installation instructions:

* The https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[`git` {tab-icon}, window="tab"] command-line tool to clone the Pulumi Playbook.

* The https://docs.npmjs.com/downloading-and-installing-node-js-and-npm[`npm` {tab-icon}, window="tab"] command-line tool to download and setup the NPM dependencies of the Pulumi Playbook.

* The https://www.pulumi.com/[Pulumi {tab-icon}, window="tab"] cloud engineering (provisioning) tool to run the Playbook.

> In addition, in order to actually operate the cluster, you should also setup:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition, in order to operate the cluster, you need to setup:
```

* The Kubernetes command-line tool, `kubectl`, allows you to run commands against Kubernetes clusters. Follow the instructions in the https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[Kubernetes documentation {tab-icon}, window="tab"]  to install `kubectl`.

== Login to your AWS account

> For first time AWS user, please register your account at https://aws.amazon.com/[https://aws.amazon.com/ {tab-icon}, window="tab"].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are a first time AWS user, please register your account at https://aws.amazon.com/[https://aws.amazon.com/ {tab-icon}, window="tab"].
```

= Installation on Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) Quick Start
:page-toclevels: 3

include::partial$include.adoc[]

NOTE: To install Akka Cloud Platform on Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS), you must have an Amazon account and a subscription to the {aws-marketplace}[Akka Cloud Platform {tab-icon}, window="tab"].

== Expected Time to Install

A new installation will take approximately _40 minutes_ to _1 hour_ depending on which components are installed.
By default the following components will be provisioned.

1. Create an Amazon EKS cluster
2. Install the Kubernetes Metrics Server
3. Install the Akka Cloud Platform Helm chart

> 4. (Optional) Setup an Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK) cluster

Reviewer 2: I think 3 and 4 are just installed, and not optional (yet)?

Author: Correct. I assume you mean the MSK and RDS clusters. I'll make these optional before merging this PR.

Author: I removed the optional text.

Author: I made them configurable in the pulumi playbook. Default is on.

[source,shell script]
----
pulumi stack output kubeconfig > kubeconfig.yml
export KUBECONFIG=./kubeconfig.yml
----

Or, if you have the `aws` command line tool you can use `aws eks update-kubeconfig` to update your `\~/.kube/config`.

[source,shell script]
----
aws eks update-kubeconfig --region $(pulumi config get "aws:region") --name $(pulumi stack output clusterName)
----

=== Connect to MSK Kafka cluster

The `confluentinc/cp-kafka` Docker image can be used to manage Kafka state.

For example, to create a Kafka `shopping-cart-events` topic:

[source,shell script]
----
kubectl run -i --tty kafka-mgmt --image=confluentinc/cp-kafka --restart=Never --rm -- \
    kafka-topics \
    --bootstrap-server="$(pulumi stack output kafkaBootstrapBrokers)" \
    --create \
    --topic shopping-cart-events \
    --replication-factor 2 \
    --partitions 4
----

=== Connect to Aurora RDS

To open a Postgres interactive shell with the Aurora DB:

[source,shell script]
----
kubectl run -i --tty rds-mgmt --image=postgres --restart=Never --rm \

>   --env=PGPASSWORD=$(pulumi stack output jdbcPassword --show-secrets) -- \

Reviewer 2: Looks like this should be `dbEndpoint` and `dbPassword`, instead of `jdbcPassword` and `jdbcEndpoint`. (looking at pulumi output)

Author: Yes, I'm in the process of renaming these to `jdbc`, but I shelved a re-factor with that rename  so I would have something stable to demo..

[source,shell script]
----
pulumi stack output
----

To output the value of only one variable use the same command and include the variable. For example, to return the clusterName.

[source,shell script]
----
pulumi stack output clusterName
----

The following output variables are available:

Amazon EKS

* `clusterName` - Cluster name
* `kubeconfig` - Complete contents of a `KUBECONFIG` configuration for the provisioned cluster
* `operatorNamespace` - Kubernetes namespace where the Akka Cloud Platform operator is running

Amazon Aurora Cluster

* `jdbcClusterId` - Cluster ID
* `jdbcDbName` - Default database created for Akka Cloud Platform
* `jdbcUsername` - Master username
* `jdbcPassword` - Master password. This is redacted in standard console output. To retrieve the value use the `pulumi stack output` command. For example, to assign the password to an environment variable: `DB_PASSWD=$(pulumi stack output jdbcPassword --show-secrets)`.
* `jdbcEndpoint` - Database writer endpoint hostname
* `jdbcReaderEndpoint` - Database reader endpoint hostname
* `jdbcSecret` - The Kubernetes Secret (in `operatorNamespace` namespace) containing relational database connection details.

> 

Reviewer 2: In output I see 
```
    dbClusterId
    dbEndpoint
    dbName 
    dbPassword
    dbReaderEndpoint
    dbSecret               
    dbUsername
```
Instead, so maybe you renamed it later?

Author: Yes. https://github.com/akka/akka-platform-guide/pull/706#discussion_r628174256

Reviewer 3: The steps under section 3 should be enumerated. they seem a bit disjunct at the moment.

AWS MSK Kafka Cluster

* `kafkaBootstrapBrokers` - Kafka bootstrap servers for `PLAINTEXT` connection (no TLS encryption)
* `kafkaBootstrapBrokersTls` - Kafka bootstrap servers for `TLS` connection
* `kafkaZookeeperConnectString` - Kafka ZooKeeper quorum connection string
* `kafkaBootstrapServerSecret` - The Kubernetes Secret (in `operatorNamespace` namespace) containing the `PLAINTEXT` Kafka bootstrap servers connection string.

> == Pulumi Playbook configuration

Reviewer 2: I don't know too much about pulumi yet, but what do you want to add here @seglo ? How to switch off building msk and db? configure anything specific? things like that?

Reviewer 2: (or possibly this is when the pulumi stuff is made more configurable, and then here we show how to set kafka version etc)

Author: All of the above and more. I added `fixme` comments where I think things should be configurable.

> _TODO_

Reviewer 2: Should we add some doc how to destroy the cluster? (even though that is also mentioned in the akka-cloud-platform-deploy repo)

Author: :+1:
